[RFC] task_group_dynamic_dependencies (#1469)
uxlfoundation/oneTBB: rfcs/proposed/task_group_dynamic_dependencies/README.md

# Extending task_group to manage dynamic dependencies between tasks

## Introduction

Back in 2021, during the move from TBB 2020 to the first release of oneTBB, 
the lowest level tasking interface changed significantly and was no longer 
promoted as a user-facing feature. Instead, the guidance since then has been 
to use the task_group or the flow graph APIs to express patterns that were 
previously expressed using with the lowest level tasking API. And for most 
cases, this has been sufficient. However, there are some use cases that create 

> dynamically expanding graphs of dependent tasks are awkward to express using 

Reviewer: I don't get this grammar. And I think awkward is likely not a good wording.

Reviewer: Suggestion: However, there is one use case which is not straightforward to express by the revised API: Dynamic task graphs which are not trees.

Author: Fixed

the existing interfaces and so this proposal expands tbb::task_group to make 
additional use cases easier to express.

The current class definition in the latest oneTBB specification for 
`tbb::task_group` is shown below. Note the `defer` function because this 
function and its return type, `task_handle`, are the foundation of our proposed

> extensions:

Reviewer: Does the defer already exist? This is not clear to me.

Author: Fixed

    class task_group {
    public:
        task_group();
        task_group(task_group_context& context);

        ~task_group();

        template<typename Func>
        void run(Func&& f);

        template<typename Func>

>         task_handle defer(Func&& f);

Reviewer: I notice that task_handle is not extensively documented atm. The docu says what it does, but not why. Can we add more docu there?

Author: Done

2. Add functions to set task dependencies. In the current `task_group`, tasks can only be waited for as a group and there is no direct way to add any before-after relationships between individual tasks. We will discuss options for spelling.
3. Add a function to move successors from a currently executing task to a new task. This functionality is necessary for recursively generated task graphs. This case represents a situation where it is safe to modify dependencies for an already submitted task. 

### Extend the semantics and useful lifetime of task_handle

Dynamic tasks graphs order the execution of tasks via dependencies on the 
completion of other tasks. They are dynamic because the creation of tasks, 
specification of dependencies between, submission of tasks for scheduling, and
execution of the tasks may happen concurrently and in various orders. Different
concrete use cases have different requirements on when new tasks are created 
and when dependencies between tasks are specified. 

For the sake of discussion, let’s label four points in a task’s lifetime: 

> 1. pre-submitted

Reviewer: Would it make sense to call this deferred?

Reviewer: Alternatively, call it "created" in line with the text below

Author: I like "deferred" since it matches the defer function name. I think it will accurately imply that it is not yet submitted. I had been concerned that a submitted task that has not-yet-ready-to-run because of dependencies could also be thought of as "deferred", but on second thought, I think deferred is different enough.

Reviewer 2: I suggest that we are careful with the term "deferred". A deferred task has a specific meaning in OpenMP. While OpenMP is not the "bible", I think it is clever to stick to their semantics or to explicitly avoid their terms where we disagree with their usage. So in this sense, my idea with "deferred" was wrong. I should have thought about this more carefully.

Author: Already changed it. Do you have a better suggestion instead? So maybe "created" then?

> 2. submitted for dependence tracking

Reviewer: The addition "for dependence tracking" is confusing

Author: I was trying, again, to differentiate with ready-to-run. Submitted to what? Submitted to the scheduler to be tracked before executing or submitted to the ready queue.  But again, I was probably over thinking this. I agree that states of 1. deferred, 2. submitted, 3. executing and 4. completed are clear enough.

specification of `task_group`, accessing a `task_handle` after it is submitted
via one of the run functions is undefined behavior. Currently, therefore, a 
`task_handle` can only represent a pre-submitted task. And currently, any task
that is run can immediately be scheduled for execution since there is no notion
of task dependencies for task_group.

The first extension is to expand the semantics and usable lifetime of
`task_handle` so that remains valid after it is passed to run and it can 
represent tasks in any state, including submitted, executing, and completed 
tasks. Similarly, a `task_handle` in the submitted state may represent a task
that has predecessors that must complete before it can executed, andso passing
a `task_handle` to `task_group::run` or `task_group::run_and_wait` only makes
it available for dependency tracking, and does not make it immediately legal to
execute.

### Add function(s) to set dependencies.

The obvious next extension is to add a mechanism for specifying dependencies
between tasks. In the most conservative view, it should only be legal to add 
additional predecessors / in-dependencies to tasks in the pre-submitted state. 

> After a task starts executing or is completed, it doesn’t make sense to add

Reviewer: I think this is not 100% correct: If a task is already running and we add a new predecessor, we can read this as a suspend/interrupt. Isn't that what you want to add? We don't need it in our code btw.

Author: Hmm, I was not intending to support a suspend. But yes, the language "doesn't make sense" is inaccurate since, as you just pointed out, it can make sense. I'll fix this to match my intention and not be overly broad.

# Extending task_group to manage dynamic dependencies between tasks

## Introduction

Back in 2021, during the move from TBB 2020 to the first release of oneTBB, 
the lowest level tasking interface changed significantly and was no longer 
promoted as a user-facing feature. Instead, the guidance since then has been 
to use the `task_group` or the flow graph APIs to express patterns that were 
previously expressed using with the lowest level tasking API. And for most 
cases, this has been sufficient. However, there is one use case which is not 
straightforward to express by the revised API: Dynamic task graphs which are 
not trees. This proposal expands `tbb::task_group` to make additional use cases 
easier to express.

> The class definition from section **[scheduler.task_group]** in the oneAPI 

Author: done

are complete it may be scheduled for execution. An executing task has started 
executing its body but is not yet complete. Finally, a completed task has
executed fully to completion.

In the current specification for `task_group`, the function `task_group::defer`
already provides a mechanism to separate task creation from submission. 
`task_group::defer` returns a `tbb::task_handle`, which represents a created 
task. A created task is in the created state until it is submitted via
the `task_group::run` or `task_group::run_and_wait` functions. In the current 
specification of `task_group`, accessing a `task_handle` after it is submitted
via one of the run functions is undefined behavior. Currently, therefore, a 
`task_handle` can only represent a created task. And currently, any task
that is run can immediately be scheduled for execution since there is no notion
of task dependencies for task_group.

The first extension is to expand the semantics and usable lifetime of
`task_handle` so that remains valid after it is passed to run and it can 
represent tasks in any state, including submitted, executing, and completed 

> tasks. Similarly, a `task_handle` in the submitted state may represent a task

Reviewer 3: I think it will be necessary to specify in more detail what that means for a task handle to be valid and represent a task in a certain state. As a C++ object, it is valid until it is destroyed, and nothing changes in this regard I guess. But what you can and cannot do with a task handle might depend on the current state of the associated task.

Author: Done

adding a new predecessor and the scheduler deciding to execute the task when its 
currently known predecessors have completed. We will revisit the discussion of 
adding predecessors to submitted tasks in the next section when we discuss 
recursively grown task graphs. 

Having mostly settled the question about when a predecessors can be added,
then next question is what can be added as a predecessor task? The most 
user-friendly answer is to have no limitation; any valid `task_handle` can act as 
a predecessor. In many cases, a developer may only know what work must be completed 
before a task can start but does not know the state of that work.

We therefore think predecessors may be in any state when they are added, 
as shown below:

<img src="add_dependency.png" width=400>

There are a number of possible options for the spelling of a function for adding 
a single predecessor. We may also want a function to allow adding multiple 
predecessors in one call.

Given two `task_handle` objects `h1` and `h2`, some possible options 
for adding `h1` as an in-dependence / predecessor of `h2` include:

- `h2.add_predecessor(h1)`
- `h2 = defer([]() { … }, h1)`
- `make_edge(h1, h2)`

> We propose including the first option. Similarly, there could be

Reviewer 3: I would prefer to not add methods to `task_handle` but use "external" functions, perhaps in the `task_group` class. This would be more consistent with the current approach (`defer`, `run`, run_and_wait`) as well as with `transfer_successors_to`.

Author: What would the signature of such a function look like? The nice part of it being in `task_handle` is that `h2.add_predecessor(h1)` is easy to understand -- h1 becomes a predecessor of h2.  As part of `task_group`, the order becomes less clear: `tg.add_predecessor(h1,h2)` might be read as adding two predecessors to `task_group` `tg`.

Reviewer 3: > What would the signature of such a function look like?

Similar to `make_edge`, but perhaps with a different name: `connect`, `set_order`, `set_dependency`, etc., with the left-to-right ordering semantics.

Currently, a `task_handle` is what its name says - a handle, an object that might represent a created task or be empty. It cannot even be copied, only moved.

The proposal suggests that a `task_handle` should represent a task at any state, so should perhaps internally track the task state somehow - that's OK. We can even think of a method to query the task state; that would also be OK.

But making the handle also tracking task dependencies, and so serving as a part of the scheduling system, rather than just an object to be scheduled, does not sound right to me. Conceptually, I see scheduling and dependency management as functions of a task group.

creates three tasks:

1. a task to sort the left half
2. a task to sort the right half
3. a task to merge the left and right sorted halves once they have been sorted. 

In a recursive merge sort, each of the sort tasks recursively takes the same 
approach to sort their portions of the collection. The top-level task (and 
subsequent recursively generated tasks) must be able to create new tasks 
and then update the graph so that their outer merge task waits for the 
newly created subtasks to complete.

<img src="merge_sort.png" width=800>

A key point about this recursive parallel algorithm is that we must change 
the predecessors of the merge tasks. But the merge tasks are already 
submitted at the time their predecessors are modified! In the previous 
section, we noted that updating the predecessors of a submitted task is 
risky, because there is a potential race.  However, in the example shown 
here, we know it’s safe to add additional predecessors to the merge task 
because it simply cannot start executing until all its current predecessors 
complete, and its predecessors are the tasks modifying the predecessors! 

> We therefore propose a very limited extension that allows the transfer of 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Therefore, the proposal is a limited extension that allows transferring 
```

> all the successors of a currently executing task to become the successors 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
all the successors of a currently executing task to become successors 
```

of a different created task. This function can only access the successors
of the currently executing task, and those tasks are prevented from executing 

> by a dependence on the current task itself, so we can ensure that we can safely 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
due to dependence on the current task itself. This ensures that it is safe to 
```

> update the incoming dependencies for those tasks without worrying about any 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
update the incoming dependencies for those tasks without worrying about
```

> potential race.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
potential race conditions. 
```

> One possible spelling for this function would be `transfer_successors_to(h)`, 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The possible spelling for this function is `transfer_successors_to(h)`. 
```

> where `h` is a `task_handle` to a created task and the 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Where `h` is a `task_handle` to a created task, and the 
```

`transfer_successors_to` function must be called from within a task. Calling
this function from outside a task, or passing anything other than a `task_handle`
representing a task in the created state is undefined behavior.

### Proposed changes to task_handle

    namespace oneapi {
    namespace tbb {
        class task_handle {
        public:

            // existing functions
            task_handle();
            task_handle(task_handle&& src);
            ~task_handle();
            task_handle& operator=(task_handle&& th);
            explicit operator bool() const noexcept;

            // proposed additions
            void add_predecessor(task_handle& th);

>             void add_successor(task_handle& th);

Reviewer 3: If we speak about the minimally required API, I doubt we need two variants of the same function, just with different name and the order of arguments. I would only keep one.

        };

>         void transfer_successors_to(task_handle& th);

Reviewer 3: I would use `tbb::task` namespace, since it is already used for `suspend` (which applies to the currently running task) and `resume` functions.

    }
    }

#### void task_handle::add_predecessor(task_handle& th);

Adds `th` as a predecessor that must complete before the task represented by
`*this` can start executing.

#### void task_handle::add_successor(task_handle& th);

Adds `th` as a successor that cannot start executing until the task represented by 
`*this` is complete.

#### void transfer_successors_to(task_handle& th);

Transfers all of the successors from the currently executing task to the task 
represented by `th`.

> ### Small examples

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Examples
```

> ##### A simple three task graph

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
##### Simple Three-Nodes Task Graph
```

> The example below shows a very simple graph with three nodes. The 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The example below shows a simple graph with three nodes. 
```

> `final_task` must wait for both the `first_task` and `second_task` 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`final_task` must wait for  `first_task` and `second_task` 
```

to complete.

    tbb::task_group tg;

    tbb::task_handle first_task = tg.defer([&] { /* task body */ });
    tbb::task_handle second_task = tg.defer([&] { /* task body */ });
    tbb::task_handle final_task = tg.defer([&] { /* task body */ });

    final_task.add_predecessor(first_task);
    final_task.add_predecessor(second_task);
    // optionally: final_task.add_predecessors(first_task, second_task);

    // order of submission is not important
    tg.run(final_task);
    tg.run(first_task);
    tg.run(second_task);

    tg.wait();

The dependency graph for this example is:

<img src="three_task_graph.png" width=400>

> #### Adding predecessors in unknown states

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Predecessors in Unknown States
```

> The example below shows a graph where the dependencies are determined 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The example below shows a graph with the dynamically determined dependencies.
```

> dynamically. The state of the predecessors may be unknown – they may 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The state of the predecessors is unknown. 
```

> be created, submitted, executing or completed. Although not shown,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Assuming that
```

> let's assume that the user's `users::find_predecessors` function 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the `users::find_predecessors` function 
```

returns, based on application logic, the tasks that must complete 
before the new work can start.

    void add_another_task(tbb::task_group& tg, int work_id) {
        tbb::task_handle new_task = tg.defer([=] { do_work(work_id); });

        for (tbb::task_handle& p : users::find_predecessors(work_id)) {
            new_task.add_predecessor(p);
        }

        tg.run(new_task);
    }

> Again, the graph, as shown below, is simple. However, now we do not 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While the graph, as shown below, is simple, 
```

> know the completion status of the predecessors. Therefore, 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the completion status of the predecessors is unknown. Therefore, 
```

> for ease-of-use, a `task_handle` should be usable as a dependency 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for ease of use, `task_handle` should be usable as a dependency 
```

> regardless of state of the task it represents. Any predecessor 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
regarding the task state. Any predecessor 
```

that is already completed when it is added as a predecessor will 

> not delay the start of the dependent task. Otherwise, end-users 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
not delay the start of the dependent task. Otherwise, the end users 
```

> will need to track these states explicitly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
do not need to track the states explicitly.
```

<img src="unknown_states.png" width=400>

> #### And example of recursive decomposition

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Recursive Decomposition
```

> This example is a version of merge-sort (with many of the details left out). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This example shows a version of merge sort, with mane details left out for simplicity. 
```

> Assume that there is an initial task that executes the function shown 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Assume an initial task executes the function shown
```

> below as its body, and the function implements that task, and also serves 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This function implements that task and serves 
```

> as the body for the recursively decomposed pieces. The beginning and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
as the body for the recursively decomposed pieces. 
```

> end of the sequence are represented by `b` and `e`, and much of the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The range of the sequence is defined by `b` (beginning) and `e` (end). 
```

> (unimportant) details of the implementation of merge-sort is hidden 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Most of the implementation details of merge sort are abstracted into the following helper functions:
```

        if (users::range_is_too_small(b, e)) {
            // base-case when range is small
            users::do_serial_sort(b, e);
        } else {
            // calculate left and right ranges
            T lb, le, rb, re;
            users::create_left_range(lb, le, b, e);
            users::create_right_range(rb, re, b, e);

            // create the three tasks
            tbb::task_handle sortleft =
                tg.defer([lb, le, &tg] {
                    merge_sort(tg, lb, le);
                });
            tbb::task_handle sortright =
                tg.defer([rb, re, &tg] {
                    merge_sort(tg, rb, re);
                });
            tbb::task_handle merge =
            tg.defer([rb, re, &tg] {
                    users::do_merge(tg, lb, le, rb, re);
                });

            // add predecessors for new merge task
            merge.add_predecessors(sortleft, sortright);

            // insert new subgraph between currently executing
            // task and its successors
            tbb::transfer_successors_to(merge);

            tg.run(sortleft);
            tg.run(sortright);
            tg.run(merge);
        }
    }

> The task tree for this example matches the one shown earlier for merge-sort. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This task tree matches the one shown earlier for merge-sort. 
```

## Open Questions in Design

> Some open questions that remain:

Reviewer 3: Should there be more implementation-level questions added, such as feasibility of implementing the proposed design, performance implications, etc.?

- Are the suggested APIs sufficient?
- Are there additional use cases that should be considered that we missed in our analysis?

> - Are there other parts of the pre-oneTBB tasking API that developers have struggled to find a good alternative for?

Reviewer 5: These are interesting questions.

While reading this RFC, I kind of rushed proposing additional syntax sugar that besides being more user-friendly, since it seems to represent popular use cases, can save some CPU cycles. So I am posting them here for a discussion.

1. Would it be useful to have a method that simultaneously joins (or even fuses?) the instantiation of a task and transferring of the current task successors?
Something like:
```cpp
    template <typename Func>
    task_handle transfer_successors_to(Func&& f);
```
For the recursive decomposition scenario, instantiating a new task within an executing task and transferring successors to that new task seems to be the main model of writing such algorithms. Although, it seems to be not saving much (only one call to the library and assign to a couple of pointers?), there is always(?) going to be such a sequence in the code. Otherwise, how else an execution of already submitted tasks can be postponed?

Shall we also consider a question of having that API _instead_ or _in addition_ to the one proposed?

2. As for `add_predecessor(s)` and `add_successor(s)` I have a couple of thoughts.
   **a.** It seems again that it might be useful to merge instantiation of the new task handles and adding them as successors/predecessors:
    ```cpp
        template <typename Func>
        void add_predecessor(Func&& f);
    
        template <typename Func>
        void add_successor(Func&& f);
    ```
   **b.** Also, I think having an API that would allow adding more than one predecessor/successor at once can be useful, since usually a number of successors/predecessors are instantiated. I only think that we don't need to limit ourselves to only two parameters as it was proposed optionally, but allow passing of an arbitrary size of task handles or even user lambdas. Of course, a pattern of having a single task producer might be viewed as a limiting one, but there actually might be the cases where tasks cannot be made available to the scheduler (i.e. spawned) until all of them are gathered together from different producers, which essentially represents a barrier in the execution pipeline. Not to mention that the spawning of a bunch of tasks all together are done faster than regular one by one spawnings. Spawning of a bunch of tasks at once was implemented in the old TBB, as far as I remember.
So here I suggest to have something like:
    ```cpp
        template <typename... Func>
        void add_predecessors(Func&& ...f);
    
        template <typename... Func>
        void add_successor(Func&& ...f);
    ```
    However, this also seems to ask for having the `task_group::run()` method to accept an arbitrary size of task handles and/or functors. So, perhaps, it is more related to another RFC/extension...

Author: I think we should start with minimal API then extend with syntactic sugar based on use cases. I suspect this will start as an experimental feature to allow some feedback on API. 

Even so, I'm also open to including these additional APIs in the initial implementation, if others think they're likely needed.

Author: We have decided to split RFC into umbrella describing goals and then specific API proposals to follow.

representing a task in the created state is undefined behavior.

### Examples

##### Simple Three-Nodes Task Graph

The example below shows a simple graph with three nodes. 
`final_task` must wait for  `first_task` and `second_task` 
to complete.

    tbb::task_group tg;

    tbb::task_handle first_task = tg.defer([&] { /* task body */ });
    tbb::task_handle second_task = tg.defer([&] { /* task body */ });
    tbb::task_handle final_task = tg.defer([&] { /* task body */ });

    final_task.add_predecessor(first_task);
    final_task.add_predecessor(second_task);

    // order of submission is not important
    tg.run(std::move(final_task));
    tg.run(std::move(first_task));
    tg.run(std::move(second_task));

    tg.wait();

The dependency graph for this example is:

<img src="three_task_graph.png" width=400>

#### Predecessors in Unknown States

The example below shows a graph where the dependencies are determined
dynamically. The state of the predecessors is unknown. The
`users::find_predecessors` function returns, based on application
logic, the tasks that must complete before the new work can start.

>     void add_another_task(tbb::task_group& tg, int work_id) {
>         tbb::task_handle new_task = tg.defer([=] { do_work(work_id); });
> 
>         for (tbb::task_handle& p : users::find_predecessors(work_id)) {
>             new_task.add_predecessor(p);
>         }
> 
>         tg.run(std::move(new_task));
>     }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    tbb::task_handle add_another_task(tbb::task_group& tg, int work_id) {
        tbb::task_handle new_task = tg.defer([=] { do_work(work_id); });

        for (tbb::task_handle& p : users::find_predecessors(work_id)) {
            new_task.add_predecessor(p);
        }
        tg.run(new_task);
        return new_task;
    }
```
The suggested change does not move the created task handle to `run()`, instead returns it to the caller. I think that would be practically necessary for `users::find_predecessors` to work,

Reviewer 6: Am I correct that `new_task` can be useful for the caller in terms of `users::find_predecessors` because it allows to make `new_task` visible for other calls of `add_another_task` and makes it possible to use is as a predecessor for other tasks?

Reviewer 3: Right, that's the idea.

            // create the three tasks
            tbb::task_handle sortleft =
                tg.defer([lb, le, &tg] {
                    merge_sort(tg, lb, le);
                });
            tbb::task_handle sortright =
                tg.defer([rb, re, &tg] {
                    merge_sort(tg, rb, re);
                });
            tbb::task_handle merge =
            tg.defer([lb, le, rb, re, &tg] {
                    users::do_merge(tg, lb, le, rb, re);
                });

            // add predecessors for new merge task
            merge.add_predecessor(sortleft);
            merge.add_predecessor(sortright);

            // insert new subgraph between currently executing
            // task and its successors
            tbb::task_group::transfer_successors_to(merge);

            tg.run(std::move(sortleft));
            tg.run(std::move(sortright));
            tg.run(std::move(merge));
        }
    }

This task tree matches the one shown earlier for merge-sort. 

## Open Questions in Design

Questions that should be addressed before moving into `experimental` and providing a preview feature:
- Are the suggested APIs sufficient?

> - Are there additional use cases that should be considered that we missed in our analysis?

Reviewer 3: The APIs seem sufficient for the considered use cases, except for semantical changes that need to be done. Some additional use cases to analyze were proposed, and currently are targeted as "post-experimental" work. I think the first question can be closed, and the second one can be either also closed or moved to that later stage.

Reviewer 6: Applied

1. **Created:** is allocated but is not yet known to the scheduling
algorithm, and therefore cannot begin executing.
2. **Submitted:** is known to the scheduling algorithm and may be
scheduled for execution whenever its incoming dependencies (predecessor tasks)
are complete.
3. **Executing:** has started executing its body but is not yet complete.
4. **Completed:** fully executed to completion.

In the current `task_group` specification, the `task_group::defer` function
already allows separate task creation and submission.
`task_group::defer` returns a `tbb::task_handle` that represents a created
task. A created task remains created until it is submitted through
`task_group::run` or `task_group::run_and_wait`. The current
`task_group` specification treats accessing a `task_handle` after it is submitted
via one of the run functions as undefined behavior. Therefore, a
`task_handle` represents a created task only. Furthermore, since `task_group`
does not support task dependencies, any task that is run can be immediately
scheduled for execution without considering dependencies.

The first extension is to expand the semantics and usable lifetime of

> `task_handle` so that it can used as a predecessor to other tasks even after it is

Reviewer 5: A typo?
```suggestion
`task_handle` so that it can be used as a predecessor to other tasks even after it is
```

empty state. Hence, some changes in `run` and `run_and_wait` semantics would also be required to handle the
`task_handle` argument differently to support the extension of its useful lifetime. One of the possible options
is to add overloads for `run` and `run_and_wait` accepting `const task_handle&` argument.

An other aspect that should be addressed is co-existence of the proposed semantics for `task_handle` with the currently
available preview feature that allows to return `task_handle` from the function object passed into `run` or `run_and_wait`. 
The option is to allow also returning the `task_handle` representing a task with added dependencies from the function object
to make it visible for tracking the dependencies.

### Add Functions to Set Dependencies.

The next logical extension is to add a mechanism for specifying dependencies
between tasks. In the most conservative view, it should only be allowed to add
predecessors (in-dependencies) to tasks in the created state.
After a task starts, adding more predecessors is irrelevant,
since it’s too late to delay the task execution.

It might be reasonable to add new predecessors to a task that is

> currently executing if it is suspended until these additional dependencies complete.

Reviewer 5: Alternatively, the "suspension support" can be added via the `tg.wait_for(task_handle)` future extension.

function implements that task, and also serves as the body for the recursively
decomposed pieces. The range of the sequence is defined by `b` (beginning) and
`e` (end). Most of the implementation details of merge sort are abstracted
into the following helper functions: `users::do_serial_sort`, `users::create_left_range`,
`users::create_right_range`, and `users::do_merge`.

    template<typename T>
    void merge_sort(tbb::task_group& tg, T b, T e) {
        if (users::range_is_too_small(b, e)) {
            // base-case when range is small
            users::do_serial_sort(b, e);
        } else {
            // calculate left and right ranges
            T lb, le, rb, re;
            users::create_left_range(lb, le, b, e);
            users::create_right_range(rb, re, b, e);

            // create the three tasks
            tbb::task_handle sortleft =
                tg.defer([lb, le, &tg] {
                    merge_sort(tg, lb, le);
                });
            tbb::task_handle sortright =
                tg.defer([rb, re, &tg] {
                    merge_sort(tg, rb, re);
                });
            tbb::task_handle merge =

>             tg.defer([lb, le, rb, re, &tg] {

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
                tg.defer([lb, le, rb, re, &tg] {
```

                    users::do_merge(tg, lb, le, rb, re);
                });

            // add predecessors for new merge task
            merge.add_predecessor(sortleft);
            merge.add_predecessor(sortright);

            // insert new subgraph between currently executing
            // task and its successors
            tbb::task_group::transfer_successors_to(merge);

            tg.run(std::move(sortleft));
            tg.run(std::move(sortright));

>             tg.run(std::move(merge));

Reviewer 5: As far as I understand, the `sortleft` and `sortright` can start executing right away after they are "moved into" `task_group` because they don't have predecessors. I wonder if there could be a usability concern similar to one that might have been with the `transfer_successors_to` function if we introduced it differently. We are introducing that extension with exactly that semantics because it allows to avoid potential data races between newly created predecessors and a successor task which has not yet started executing. I mean that in this particular example there is nothing to race between currently executing task and `sortleft`/`sortright` tasks, but in real example there might be some shared data between all these tasks, and the existence of potential data race might not be that obvious to the user. I guess even the `merge` task, which was "moved into" `tg` the last, might have been completed (including its successors that have just been moved to it? and successors of successors, and so on ...) before this `tg.run(std::move(merge))` call returns to the current task.

We should choose: either defer execution of the newly created tasks until current one completes ("insert new subgraph in between" for real) and hence reduce potential parallelism in the system or allow (perhaps not that obvious) races.

Reviewer 3: The possibility of data races you describe is not new. With or without the new APIs, any `task_group` task can get a reference to that very group and start new tasks via `run`, not even using task handles. If data are shared between these tasks, users are responsible to prevent data races.

> # Extend ``task_group`` for Dynamic Task Dependencies

Reviewer 6: I have noticed one thing that is not related to the dependencies between tasks, but relates into covering the migration from the old tasking API to another, so I decided to add it as a comment here.

Let's consider the recursive Fibonacci example rewritten using the API proposed in this RFC (the splitting stage):

```cpp
long* left = new long(0);
long* right = new long(0);

tbb::task_handle fib_left = tg.defer([&tg, num, left] {
    recursive_fib(tg, num - 2, *left);
});
tbb::task_handle fib_right = tg.defer([&tg, num, right] {
    recursive_fib(tg, num - 1, *right);
});
tbb::task_handle fib_sum = tg.defer([&result, left, right] {
    result = *left + *right;
    delete left;
    delete right;
});
```
|
The main difference between merge sort and this example is some data that is required for executing the task (`left` and `right` - the placeholders for partial results of Fibonacci calculations on leaft).
Since the lifetime of this data should be preserved until the sum task is executed, it cannot be placed on stack of current function and needs to be allocated dynamically. 
Back to old TBB, this data was placed inside of the corresponding task that provides the required lifetime guarantees.
The question is do we need to extend the `task_handle` API somehow to allow putting the additional data to the task.

Author: I agree that this should be explored.  Maintaining the lifetime of referenced objects is not a new issue, since the same problem exists for task_group::run and task_arena::enqueue, and even arguable for objects pass through a flow graph. That said, the old pre-oneTBB tasking interface provided a more obvious way to do this for task graphs via task objects.

specification of dependencies, submission for scheduling, and task execution
may happen concurrently and in various orders. Different
use cases have different requirements on when tasks are created
and when dependencies are specified.

For the sake of discussion, let’s define four points in a task’s lifetime:

1. **Created:** is allocated but is not yet known to the scheduling
algorithm, and therefore cannot begin executing.
2. **Submitted:** is known to the scheduling algorithm and may be
scheduled for execution whenever its incoming dependencies (predecessor tasks)
are complete.
3. **Executing:** has started executing its body but is not yet complete.
4. **Completed:** fully executed to completion.

In the current `task_group` specification, the `task_group::defer` function
already allows separate task creation and submission.
`task_group::defer` returns a `tbb::task_handle` that represents a created
task. A created task remains created until it is submitted through
`task_group::run` or `task_group::run_and_wait`. The current
`task_group` specification treats accessing a `task_handle` after it is submitted

> via one of the run functions as undefined behavior. Therefore, a

Author: Yes, needs to be added.

`task_handle` represents a created task only. Furthermore, since `task_group`
does not support task dependencies, any task that is run can be immediately
scheduled for execution without considering dependencies.

The first extension is to expand the semantics and usable lifetime of
`task_handle` so that it can used as a predecessor to other tasks even after it is
passed to run. The handle will track the state of its associated task and may represent
a task that is created, submitted, executing, or completed. Similarly, a submitted `task_handle`
may represent a task that depends on predecessors that must complete before it can execute.
In that case, passing a `task_handle` to `task_group::run` or `task_group::run_and_wait` only makes

> it available for dependency tracking but does not make it immediately eligible for execution.

Author: Yes, run and enqueue functions are not yet well covered.

section, updating the predecessors of a submitted task can be
risky due to the potential for a race condition. However, in this case,
it is safe to add or change predecessors to the merge task. 
This is because the merge task cannot start execution until all of its current predecessors 
complete. Those predecessors are the tasks responsible for modifying the merge task dependencies. 

Therefore, we propose a limited extension that allows transferring 
all the successors of the currently executing task to become the successors 
of a different created task. This function can only access the successors
of the currently executing task, and those tasks are prevented from executing 
by a dependence on the current task itself, so we can ensure that we can safely 
update the incoming dependencies for those tasks without worrying about
potential race conditions. 

One possible spelling for this function would be `transfer_successors_to(h)`, 
Where `h` is a `task_handle` to a created task, and the 
`transfer_successors_to` function must be called from within a task. Calling
this function from outside a task or passing anything other than a `task_handle`

> representing a task in the created state is undefined behavior.

Reviewer 6: I think we need to add information about possible limitations (or lack of limitations) for the task states represented by `task_handle` to which we are transferring the successors. Does it sufficient to allow only the handles representing created tasks, or other 3 states are also allowed (i.e. transferring successors to the task_handle that was already submitted to `task_group::run`).

            task_group_status run_and_wait(const Func& f);

            task_group_status run_and_wait(task_handle&& h);

            task_group_status wait();
            void cancel();

            // proposed addition
            static void transfer_successors_to(task_handle& th);
        };
    }
    }

#### void task_handle::add_predecessor(task_handle& th);

Adds `th` as a predecessor that must complete before the task represented by
`*this` can start executing.

#### void task_group::transfer_successors_to(task_handle& th);

Transfers all of the successors from the currently executing task to the task 
represented by `th`.

### Examples

##### Simple Three-Nodes Task Graph

The example below shows a simple graph with three nodes. 
`final_task` must wait for  `first_task` and `second_task` 
to complete.

    tbb::task_group tg;

    tbb::task_handle first_task = tg.defer([&] { /* task body */ });
    tbb::task_handle second_task = tg.defer([&] { /* task body */ });
    tbb::task_handle final_task = tg.defer([&] { /* task body */ });

    final_task.add_predecessor(first_task);
    final_task.add_predecessor(second_task);

    // order of submission is not important

>     tg.run(final_task);
>     tg.run(first_task);
>     tg.run(second_task);

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    tg.run(std::move(final_task));
    tg.run(std::move(first_task));
    tg.run(std::move(second_task));
```

    tg.wait();

The dependency graph for this example is:

<img src="three_task_graph.png" width=400>

#### Predecessors in Unknown States

The example below shows a graph where the dependencies are determined
dynamically. The state of the predecessors is unknown. The
`users::find_predecessors` function returns, based on application
logic, the tasks that must complete before the new work can start.

    void add_another_task(tbb::task_group& tg, int work_id) {
        tbb::task_handle new_task = tg.defer([=] { do_work(work_id); });

        for (tbb::task_handle& p : users::find_predecessors(work_id)) {
            new_task.add_predecessor(p);
        }

>         tg.run(new_task);

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
        tg.run(std::move(new_task));
```

    template<typename T>
    void merge_sort(tbb::task_group& tg, T b, T e) {
        if (users::range_is_too_small(b, e)) {
            // base-case when range is small
            users::do_serial_sort(b, e);
        } else {
            // calculate left and right ranges
            T lb, le, rb, re;
            users::create_left_range(lb, le, b, e);
            users::create_right_range(rb, re, b, e);

            // create the three tasks
            tbb::task_handle sortleft =
                tg.defer([lb, le, &tg] {
                    merge_sort(tg, lb, le);
                });
            tbb::task_handle sortright =
                tg.defer([rb, re, &tg] {
                    merge_sort(tg, rb, re);
                });
            tbb::task_handle merge =
            tg.defer([rb, re, &tg] {
                    users::do_merge(tg, lb, le, rb, re);
                });

            // add predecessors for new merge task
            merge.add_predecessor(sortleft);
            merge.add_predecessor(sortright);

            // insert new subgraph between currently executing
            // task and its successors
            tbb::task_group::transfer_successors_to(merge);

>             tg.run(sortleft);
>             tg.run(sortright);
>             tg.run(merge);

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
            tg.run(std::move(sortleft));
            tg.run(std::move(sortright));
            tg.run(std::move(merge));
```

        }
    }

This task tree matches the one shown earlier for merge-sort. 

## Open Questions in Design

Some open questions that remain:

- Are the suggested APIs sufficient?
- Should we add a function to adds more than one predecessor as single call, such as `add_predecessors`?
- Should we add functions that merge creation and definition of predecessor tasks, such as
`template <typename Func> add_predecessor(Func&& f);`.

> - Are there additional use cases that should be considered that we missed in our analysis?

Reviewer 3: I can suggest a few more potentially interesting cases:
- a wavefront, where tasks have multiple predecessors and multiple successors;
- a two-stage parallel scan (reduce-then-scan), with left-to-right propagation of the accumulated prefix sum;
- non-trivial divide-and-conquer patterns, such as Matteo Frigo's algorithm for N-Body problem (see e.g. https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/122680/6-172-fall-2010/contents/projects/MIT6_172F10_proj4_1.pdf)

These seem to be interesting examples of "dynamic task graphs that are not trees", as stated in the introduction. I do not suggest that we must support these patterns, but it is interesting to see if we could, and what would be needed for that.

Author: Yes, more example would be good. In particular, we need to see if the very limited ways to add and modified predecessors is sufficient. And how lifetimes of task handles will be managed.
